Introduction

The rise in greenhouse gases due to anthropogenic activities is increasing global temperatures. Variations in global temperatures influence the hydrological cycle and water consumption in households (Punia et al., 2022). Many studies have examined impacts of climate change on water supply (Ayanlade, 2023), water availability (Punia et al., 2022), renewable energy (Elum, 2017), household income and food security (Zakari et al., 2022). Influence of climate change on volume of water consumed by poor urban households is yet to be explored, though there have been evidences suggesting that water usage is a function of weather variability (Adamowski et al., 2012, Breyer et al., 2012, Guhathakurta and Gober, 2007). 
In addition, the influence of the climatic factors from that of the socio-economic factors have not been distinguished. Rather urban water consumption was distinguished into base water consumption (BWC); and seasonal water consumption (SWC) (Eslamian et al., 2016; Rasifaghihi et al., 2020). BWC was taken as indoor water use, while SWC was seen as outdoor water use. BWC was thought to be insensitive to climate effects, but sensitive to socio-economic factors. SWC was considered as dependent on changes in air temperature and precipitation. In most of the studies, the forecast results are site-specific; that is, they reflect the conditions of the study area. 

Climate Change and Water Consumption

The United Nations declares that climate change is primarily a water crisis. Its impacts are seen in worsening floods, rising sea levels, and droughts. But water can fight climate change. Sustainable water management can help to build the resilience of societies and ecosystems and reduce carbon emissions (UN Water, 2025). Most impacts of climate change come down to water, in form of water-related hazards such as floods and droughts, as rising temperatures disrupt the entire water cycle (UN, 2025). Climate change is increasing water scarcity and making it even harder for poor people to get clean water. According to WaterAid (2021), people need reliable water supply that keeps pumping through flood, drought and natural disasters in order to meet their daily livelihood. It is estimated that half the world’s population (~4 billion out of ~8 billion people) are currently subject to severe water scarcity due to climatic and non-climate factors. It is also estimated that limiting global warming to 1.5°C would minimize the increase in risks in the various water use sectors and keep adaptation effective (IPCC, 2022). 

Understanding influence of climate change on water consumption will help managers and planners develop strategies to reduce water consumption (Dias and Ghisi, 2024).  Qin et al., (2022) utilized a novel dataset where daily water usage from over 40,000 households in ten China provinces were collected over the years 2010–2019 using smart meters, to investigate how climate variability affected household water demand. They found increasing marginal impacts of water usage with respect to temperature intervals. Compared to a below 5 °C day, water usage increased by around 16 l/household-day at the 5–10 °C interval to 45 l/household-day at the highest interval of above 30 °C. Gosling and Arnell (2013) evaluated water consumption impact due to climate change. The study was based on climate change patterns from 21 global climate models in four scenarios, which were applied to a global hydrological model to estimate water resources in 1339 river basins. As a result, the authors found that between 1.6 and 2.4 billion people currently live in river basins exposed to water scarcity. The climate change effect by 2050 will place 0.5 to 3.1 billion people in situations of water scarcity. Zapata (2021) states that bottled water consumption is associated with an increased temperature. The author points out that the use of this resource is influenced by factors related to water availability (per capita water consumption and piped water availability) and the perception of the quality of water received by the public supply system. Regarding climatic conditions, the author states that a 1 °C increase in the average temperature will result in an increase of approximately one fifth in bottled water consumption. Chang, et al., (2014) discovered that the correlation between temperature and water consumption is consistently higher than that between precipitation and water consumption. Qin et al., (2022) found that households in China are using increasingly more water to cope with high-temperature days.  Moreover, the studies utilized air temperature as one of the climatic factors instead of land surface temperature. 

Land surface temperature (LST) is a measure of how hot the land is to the touch. Air temperature (AT), on the other hand, is the temperature of the environment above the ground surface. The difference in LST between urban and non-urban areas is called surface urban heat island.  LST is used for effective climate modelling and climate-sensitive urban planning (Chayapong & Dasananda, 2012; Gago et al., 2013). Scientists monitor LST because the warmth radiating from Earth's landscapes influences, and is influenced by, global weather and climate patterns. LST has both spatial and temporal extent (Saleh et al., 2023) and urbanization usually increases its intensity (Peterson, 2003; Gaffin et al., 2008). 

LST used in this study has only spatial dimension since it is mapped in relation to the location of urban poor households. Moreover, it also has seasonal variation since it is measured in both dry season and wet season. Thus, this study utilizes LST instead of AT to study the impact of climate change on volume of water consumed in poor urban households. The aim is to assess the impact of climate change temperature variability on volume of water consumed by poor urban households. Spatial and seasonal variations of LST in the study area as a result of climate change is mapped in relation to the location of urban poor households using geospatial technologies. The mapped pattern is fed into machine learning algorithms for modeling and prediction. 

Geospatial Technology and Machine Learning Modeling

Geospatial technology (GST) is a collective term for the various modern technologies that help in collection, analysis and interpretation of geospatial data (Muppudathi, 2014; Reed & Ritz, 2003). GST includes remote sensing (RS), Global Positioning System (GPS) and Geospatial Information System (GIS). GST, which represents the physical world in a virtual environment, is used in modelling, simulation and visualization of geospatial information, which can inform both present and future decisions. GPS and GIS systems are used in this study to collect and process geospatial data respectively. The collected and processed data are then integrated with machine leaning algorithms to model water consumption by the urban poor. 

A machine learning model is an algorithm for regression and/or classification. Four machine learning regression models (Multilinear Regression, Random Forest, Support Vector Regression, and Artificial Neural Network) were chosen for this work. The four models were chosen because they represent models in the supervised learning category for regression analysis, and it has been shown that Neural Network-based techniques outperform conventional techniques and provide effective solutions for many geospatial data analysis tasks (Kiwelekar et al., 2020).  

Implementing the Models

Four machine learning techniques, Multilinear Regression (MLR), Random Forest (RF), Support Vector Regression (SVR), and Artificial Neural Network (ANN), were employed for the modelling. The models were implemented with codes in JupyterLab® environment where the experiments were carried out. 

Materials and Methods

Datasets

Nyanya-Mararaba Dataset

This study use Nyanya-Mararaba datasets described in Taiwo et. al (2023). 

Control Datasets

Volume of water consumed per day for dry and wet seasons, represented by September to February and March to August respectively, were extracted from the questionnaire for each respondent. A dataset consisting of 1200 records was derived for each season of the year, resulting in two datasets, one for dry season and another for wet season. The two are the control datasets for this study.

Climate Change Datasets

The datasets used for climate change experiment is same as the complete dataset described above, the only difference being the addition of land surface temperature. This was included to account for climate variability within the poor urban environment. Figure 2 shows distribution of household water consumption and average LST in the climate datasets. 

LST Data 

LST for dry and wet seasons for each household location was extracted from LST images in ArcMap® using the Extract Values to Points tool among the Extraction tools under the Spatial Analysis toolbox in the ArcToolbox. 

Experimental Design

The MLR, RF, SVR and ANN models were coded with Python in JupyterLab®. They were each created as an instance of their respective classes in Scikit Learn® library: SGDRegressor, RandomForestRegressor, LinearSVR and MLPRegressor, which were each infused with a scaler to scale the dataset (Pedregosa et al., 2012).  Thus, we had an empty model. The model was then trained or fitted with the training dataset. Training enables the model to learn the relationship between the explanatory variables and the target variable. After training, the model was ready for predictions. The results were evaluated. If the resulting errors were not within tolerance (0.70 ≤ R2 ≥ 0.99), then the model needed refining through parameter tuning and it was built again. If the errors were within tolerance, then the model should be built with the parameters obtained. Afterward, the model was validated and tested.

Training, Validation and Testing

Training a model is a process of fitting it with a dataset so that the learning algorithm can learn the data and the relationships among the features. Training prepares the model for and gives it ability to generalize what it has learnt to new dataset it has not “seen” before. This allows the model to make prediction based on what it has learnt.  A major problem with training is called overfitting, a situation in which the model learns well the training dataset but unable to generalize and make good predictions with new dataset. To avoid overfitting, the dataset was split into three: training data, validation data and test data. After training, validation dataset was used to assess the model performance. If satisfied, then the model was tested with the test dataset, which acts as a new data that the model had never “seen” before. The performance of the model when fed with the test dataset shows how it will perform when it encounters new data in the world. Standard split ratio found in literature are 60-20-20 percent, 70-15-15 percent, and 80-10-10 percent. 80-10-10 was adopted for this study.

Model Performance Metrics

Three error metrics were used to measure the performance of the model: Mean Absolute Error (MAE), Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) and R square (R2). 

Results and Discussion

Performance of Machine Learning Models with and without Climate Change Data

The wet and dry seasons datasets which are the datasets without climate data serves as the control dataset. whereas the datasets with climate data serves as the complete datasets. Each of the models was trained, validated and tested with the complete dataset and the control data. 

RF and ANN perform better than other models. Moreover, generally speaking, all the models perform better with climate data in both dry and wet seasons than without climate data. For example, with climate data, in wet season, during validation, MLR, RF, SVR, ANN have R2 of 0.85, 1.00, 0.75, 1.00 respectively, whereas without climate data they have R2 of 0.75, 0.95, 0.63, 0.95 respectively. In dry season, with climate data, during validation MLR, RF, SVR, ANN have R2 of 0.84, 1.00, 0.77, 1.00, whereas, without climate data, they have R2 of 0.88, 0.99, 0.88, 0.94 respectively. 

Volume of Water Consumed in Dry and Wet Seasons with Climate Change Data

The experiment carried out here assesses the actual and predicted volume of water consumed in relation to climate variability in poor urban households. When the climate dataset was imputed in each of the model, the actual and predicted volume of water consumed are listed in Table 9. RF produced the least residuals in both dry and wet seasons. Average volume of water consumed in the households in the study area in a day in dry season is 147.35 liters, while the average consumed in wet season is 167.35 liters. Again, poor households in the study area consume more water during wet season than dry season. 

Without climate change dataset, the RF model predicted 147.36 liters as the average volume of water consumed in each household in dry season, while the average volume of water consumed in the wet season is predicted as 167.35 liters. When climate change dataset was added to the features, the RF model predicted 147.36 liters as the total volume of water consumed in dry season, while it predicted 167.35 liters as the average volume of water consumed in the wet season. That is, at household level, difference in volume of water consumed in relation to climate change is negligible. 

The machine learning models predicted a difference of 0.1 liter between volume of water consumed with and without climate change data. That is, the difference in water consumption as a result of climate change in the study area is negligible. Contrasting findings in literature suggest that volume of water consumed in households increases with increasing climate temperature change (Chang et al., 2014; Mardy et al., 2015; Qin et al., 2022). There are possible reasons for this contrast. First, those studies were not done among poor urban households, which suggests that poor households’ challenges in accessing clean water are different. For example, Taiwo et al., (2023) found that poor households in Nigeria’s Federal Capital Territory pay ten times more for drinking water because they are not linked with WDN. In addition, poor urban people spend more than 30-minute travel time to access clean water. These socio-economic challenges could explain why volume of water consumed by poor urban households does not change with climate variability. 

This study found a very weak correlation (r = 0.04) between LST and volume of water consumed by the poor urban households in the study area. The very weak correlation conforms with the fact that there is no significant difference in the prediction of volume of water consumed in the study area with or without climate variability. Our results are in line with the findings of de Souza (2015) in which weak correlations between the variables were discovered. A possible explanation is based on seasonality, with wet and dry seasons in the study area, and low temperature variability. 

Conclusion 

This study utilizes land surface temperature (LST) to study the impact of climate change on volume of water consumed in poor urban households. The aim is to assess the impact of climate change temperature variability on volume of water consumed by poor urban households. Spatial and seasonal variations of LST in the study area as a result of climate change was mapped in relation to the location of poor urban households using geospatial technologies. The mapped pattern was fed into four machine learning models for modeling and prediction. Significance test shows that there is no significant difference in model performance when climate data was included and when climate data was not included in the modelling. 
The machine learning models predicted a difference of 0.1 liter between volume of water consumed with and without climate change data. That is, the difference in water consumption as a result of climate change in the study area is negligible. In addition, weak correlation of 0.04 was found between LST and volume of water consumed, which conforms with the fact that there is no significant difference in volume of water consumed in the study area with or without climate variability. That is, climate temperature variability does not influence the volume of water consumed by the poor urban households in the study area. 

Impact of climate change variability on the volume of water consumed by urban poor households has been studied using the combination of geospatial technology and machine learning techniques with an integration of geospatial and non-geospatial data. The finding that climate change variability has negligible impact on the volume of water consumed by urban poor households has been highlighted, and should be a subject for consideration by policy makers. However, the study is limited to the impact of land surface temperature while other climate variables such as surface air temperature, precipitation, humidity and wind speed were not considered. Hence, further studies should be carried out among the urban poor in other cities investigating the impact of other climate variables or a combination of all climate variables on volume of water consumed. 



